# EVAL Notation 
In Lisp, functions are data, and EVAL notation allows us to write
functions that accept other functions as inputs. We’ll explore this
possibility further in chapter 7.

3.2 THE EVAL FUNCTION
The EVAL function is the heart of Lisp. EVAL’s job is to evaluate Lisp
expressions to compute their result. Most expressions consist of a function
followed by a set of inputs. 


3.4 EVALUATION RULES DEFINE THE BEHAVIOR OF EVAL
EVAL works by following a set of evaluation rules. One rule is that numbers
and certain other objects are ‘‘self-evaluating,’’ meaning they evaluate to
themselves. The special symbols T and NIL also evaluate to themselves.
23 ⇒ 23
t ⇒ t
nil ⇒ nil


Evaluation Rule for Lists: The first element of the list specifies a
function to be called. The remaining elements specify arguments to the
function. The function is called on the evaluated arguments.


3.7 EVALUATING SYMBOLS
The names a function uses for its arguments are independent of the names any
other function uses. 

Evaluation Rule for Symbols: A symbol evaluates to the value of the
variable it refers to.

Outside the bodies of HALF and SQUARE, the symbol N refers to the
global variable named N. A global variable is one that is not associated with
any function. PI is an example of a global variable that is built in to Common
Lisp.
pi ⇒ 3.14159


3.8 USING SYMBOLS AND LISTS AS DATA
But in EVAL notation symbols are used to name variables, so if we write (equal kirk spock)
Lisp will think we are trying to compare the value of the global variable
named KIRK with the value of the global variable named SPOCK. 

We can tell Lisp to treat KIRK and SPOCK as data rather than as variable references by
putting a quote before each one.
(equal ’kirk ’spock) ⇒ nil

Because the symbols T and NIL evaluate to themselves, they don’t need to be
quoted to use them as data. Most other symbols do, though.
(list ’james t ’kirk) ⇒ (james t kirk)

Lists also need to be quoted to use them as data; otherwise Lisp will try to
evaluate them, which typically results in an ‘‘undefined function’’ error.
(first (we hold these truths))  ⇒ Error! WE undefined function.
(first ’(we hold these truths)) ⇒ we


3.9 THE PROBLEM OF MISQUOTING


3.10 THREE WAYS TO MAKE LISTS

’(foo bar baz) ⇒ (foo bar baz)
(list ’foo ’bar ’baz) ⇒ (foo bar baz)
(cons ’foo ’(bar baz)) ⇒ (foo bar baz)

One advantage of building the list up from individual elements is that some of
the elements can be computed rather than specified directly.
(list 33 ’squared ’is (* 33 33))
⇒ (33 squared is 1089)
If we quote a list, nothing inside it will get evaluated:
’(33 squared is (* 33 33))
⇒ (33 squared is (* 33 33))


3.12 MORE ABOUT VARIABLES
In Lisp, a function creates variables automatically when it is is invoked; they
(usually) go away when the function returns. 


选择Lisp编辑器的原则
There are two more things a good Lisp editor provides. One is an easy
way to evaluate expressions while editing. You can position the cursor (or
mouse) on a function definition, hit a few keys, and that function definition
will be evaluated without ever leaving the editor. The second thing a good
editor provides is rapid access to online documentation. If I want to see the
documentation for any Lisp function or variable, I can call it up with just a few
keystrokes. The editor also provides online documentation about itself.


3.18 INTERNAL STRUCTURE OF SYMBOLS
We can extract the various components of a symbol using built-in
Common Lisp functions like SYMBOL-NAME and SYMBOL-FUNCTION.
The following dialog illustrates this; you’ll see something slightly different if
you try it on your computer, but the basic idea is the same.
> (symbol-name ’equal)
"EQUAL"
> (symbol-function ’equal)
#<Compiled EQUAL function {60463B0}>


3.20 SCOPE OF VARIABLES
The scope of a variable is the region in which it may be referenced.


3.21 EVAL AND APPLY
APPLY is also a Lisp primitive function. APPLY takes a function and a
list of objects as input.

The first argument to APPLY should be quoted with #’ rather than
an ordinary quote; #’ is the proper way to quote functions supplied as inputs
to other functions. This will be explained in more detail in Chapter 7.
(apply #’+ ’(2 3)) ⇒ 5
(apply #’equal ’(12 17)) ⇒ nil







